Blog: Why (and how) you should decouple deployment from release (#6684)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/decouple-deployment-from-release.md

A best practice for improving this is decoupling deployment and release. What does this mean, though? This post goes over the differences between the two, why you should decouple them, examples, and how to get started.

## What are the differences between deployment and release?

The process of delivering code starts with writing and testing code locally. After completing a piece of code, it often goes through reviews and more tests before integrating with the existing codebase. 

Once integrated, the new code deploys. Deployment means getting code from a local machine or repository into production. Your app or build containing the new code becomes available on production infrastructure.

A release is when the new code is made available to users. By default, as soon as code is deployed, it is automatically released. This is because there is nothing preventing users or systems from accessing the new code available on production infrastructure.

This means teams often hold deployments until they are confident the code is ready to release.

![Delivery process](../images/blog/decouple-deployment-from-release/delivery.png)

## Why should you separate deployment and release?

> The main issue caused by coupling deployment and release is new code not working as expected in production. Because it is released automatically, this means users are impacted by issues. For example, queries that worked locally timing out on production data.

Reviewer: Dont think that sentence is needed
```suggestion
The main issue caused by coupling deployment and release is new code not working as expected in production. For example, queries that worked locally timing out on production data.
```

Reviewer 2: +1

By preventing new code from automatically releasing after a deployment, you lower the risk of this issue. This is called **decoupling deployment from release**.

Decoupling can lower the risk of issues, increase developer productivity, and improve app reliability. The specific benefits include:

- Improves developer confidence knowing they can [test in production](/blog/testing-in-production) and that there is an easy way to roll back changes without affecting users.

- Increase deployment frequency by removing the need to wait for a formal release. 

- Developers can follow [trunk-based development](https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com/) and merge to `main` more often instead of waiting on branches. This increases shipping velocity and reduces merge conflicts.

- Developers can pass off releases to product managers and marketers once they deploy. They can coordinate elaborate launches and stakeholders without holding up development.

- Less downtime from broken releases and easier rollbacks when an issue does occur.

## How we decouple deployment from release at PostHog

> As an example of decoupling deployment from release, we can look at what we do at PostHog. We deploy many changes behind [feature flags](/feature-flags) and release them after testing them in production. At any time, there are [30+ flags](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/blob/03eb1dcaec3cf5064a1ace4433f2f77d6676b634/frontend/src/lib/constants.tsx#L118C1-L118C1) in use in PostHog. They are created and updated daily.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We deploy many changes behind [feature flags](/feature-flags) and release them after testing them in production. At any time, there are [30+ flags](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/blob/03eb1dcaec3cf5064a1ace4433f2f77d6676b634/frontend/src/lib/constants.tsx#L118C1-L118C1) in use in PostHog. They are created and updated daily.
````

Don't need this line given you have the heading already.

![PostHog's flags](../images/blog/decouple-deployment-from-release/flags.png)

These flags help us dogfood features, roll out changes to specific users, do incremental rollouts, and more. For example, in the flags above, we deployed 5 new features without releasing them.

We also dark launch features using feature flags. This means they are available in production but hidden from users. For example, they might only be accessible through the API, don’t have navigation links, or only have limited options shown to users.

All this enables us to ship and get features into the hands of users faster at PostHog. 

## How top companies decouple deployment from release

> As mentioned, decoupling deployment from release is a best practice. To prove this, here are more examples of how top companies decouple deployment from release and what that specifically looks like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Again, I think you can live without the intro line.

- [Lyft](https://eng.lyft.com/continuous-deployment-at-lyft-9b457314771a) follows continuous deployment for its microservices architecture. Each deployment goes through a pipeline of staging, canary, and single zone before production. They automate jobs, monitoring, and testing for this pipeline, and they use "gates" at each step to block deployments if broken. They also wait for deploys to "bake" in production environments to check for issues before releasing.

- [Grab](https://engineering.grab.com/our-journey-to-continuous-delivery-at-grab) deploys to a staging environment then schedules deployments to a canary environment then production. They make deployment and monitoring as easy as possible and only notify developers about issues when they must make a decision.

## How you can decouple deployment from release

> Now that you understand the merits of decoupling deployments from release and some examples of how top companies do it, how do you make it happen yourself? Two of the easiest ways to get started are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you understand the merits of decoupling deployments from release and some examples of how top companies do it, how can you do it yourself? Two of the easiest ways to get started are:
```

1. **Feature flags.** Deploy features behind [feature flags](/docs/feature-flags). Use conditional rollouts to roll out features to the internal team, beta users, and canary release.

> 2. **Dark launch.** Launch new routes and features, but hide them from users (don’t link or notify them). For example, create a new feature page and don’t link to it anywhere so that it's only accessible using a direct link (that only your team knows).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Dark launch.** Launch new routes and features, but hide them from users (don’t link or notify them). For example, create a new feature page and don’t link to it anywhere, so it's only accessible using a direct link (that only your team knows).
```

> ---

Reviewer: FYI I wasnt able to open the vercel preview of this page

> title: Why (and how) you should decouple deployment from release

Reviewer: Maybe easier to read? 
```suggestion
title: Why you should decouple deployment from release (and how) 
```

date: 2023-09-07
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/green-blog-image.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
 - Guides
 - Explainers
---

> You build software for others to use. This means you need a process for getting that software to those people. This is easier than ever thanks to the internet, hosting services, code management platforms, integration pipelines, and more innovations.
> 
> What remains a challenge is delivering code to people **safely**. A best practice for doing this is decoupling deployment and release, but what does this even mean? This post goes over the differences between the two, why you should decouple them, examples, and how to get started.

Reviewer: The first paragraph is a bit dull, maybe we can remove it?
Maybe something like this:

```suggestion
Picture this: You and your team have been working for months on a large feature. The time has come to release the feature, but how can you do so **safely** and without causing any outages or major issue?

A best practice for doing this is decoupling deployment and release. What does this mean, though? This post goes over the differences between the two, why you should decouple them, examples, and how to get started.
```

Author: Rewrote

## What are the differences between deployment and release?

The process of delivering code starts with writing and testing code locally. After completing a piece of code, it often goes through reviews and more tests before integrating with existing code. 

Once integrated, the new code deploys. Deployment means getting code from a local machine or repository into production. Your application or build containing the new code becomes accessible on production infrastructure.

> After deploying successfully, the code releases for users to start using it. The application exposes in production and the functionality becomes available. A release comes after a deployment, and by default, couples to it. This means it happens immediately after a deployment succeeds.

Author: Rewrote

> ![Delivery process](../images/blog/decouple-deployment-from-release/delivery.png)

Reviewer: Nice image

> This whole process is the software delivery process. Deployment and release are two separate, but critical parts of it.

Reviewer: Do we really need to say this is the software delivery process. Feels a bit dull

```suggestion
```

Author: Removed

> ## Why should you decouple deployment and release?

Reviewer: I think separate is easier to understand than decouple

```suggestion
## Why should you separate deployment and release?
```

> Without restrictions, deployed code is released code. This coupling of deployment and release can cause two main issues:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, deployed code is released code. This coupling of deployment and release can cause two main issues:
```

1. Problems isolated to the new code due to deployment. For example, a value saving locally but not in production due to an unexpected interaction with the production database.

> 2. Problems with the entire release due to new code. This is a broken release. For example, values created by new features corrupt other data unexpectedly in the production database.

Reviewer: Took me a while to understand what "Problems isolated to the new code due to deployment" and "Problems with the entire release due to new code" mean. I dont think its super clear. Can we make it simpler, and with an example?

Maybe something like this:

>  This coupling of deployment and release can cause two main issues:
>
> 1. Their may be bugs in your new code, causing your feature not to work as expected
> 2. Their may be bugs in your code that cause your entire app to crash, causing a broken release

Author: Rewrote

> Decoupling deployment from release lowers the risk of these issues. This is because it enables testing code in production before releasing it. You can identify issues arising from production infrastructure and integration with the final, real release. 

Reviewer: Maybe we should explain a bit first what decoupling means:
```suggestion
By preventing new code from automatically releasing after a deployment, you lower the risk of these issues. This is what is referred to as **decoupling deployment from release**.

It enables testing code in production before releasing it. You can identify issues arising from production infrastructure and integration with the final, real release. 
```

On top of lowering the risk of issues, decoupling can increase developer productivity and app reliability. The specific benefits include:

- Since developers don’t need to wait for a release to deploy, they can ship, [test in production](/blog/testing-in-production), and get feedback faster.

> - By helping developers worry less about breaking the release, decoupling creates psychological safety. It makes developers more productive knowing they can roll back a change easily without impacting users.

Reviewer: Not sure my phrasing is 100% right
```suggestion
- By easing developers worry about breaking releases, it enables them to move fast and be more productive. They know they can roll back a change easily without impacting users.
```

Author: Rewrote

> - Developers can pass off releases to product managers and marketers once they deploy. They can continue to code instead of needing to coordinate with stakeholders.

Reviewer: hmm interesting. Not sure how true this is. PMs still usually rely on eng to make the release in my experience

Author: Clarified too

> - Building the infrastructure for rollbacks (like [feature flags](/feature-flags)) makes rollbacks easier and decreases user impact. Creates less downtime when there is an issue.

Reviewer: didnt we already mention this above?

Author: Clarified split between devs and app reliabiltiy

> - Promote trunk-based development by merging to `main` more often instead of changes waiting on branches. Reduces merge conflicts.

Reviewer: What is trunk-based development? (I know what it is, but Im not sure everyone will. Maybe lets hyperlink to more info on this?)
```suggestion
- Promote trunk-based development by merging to `main` more often instead of changes waiting on branches. Reduces merge conflicts.
```

Author: Clarified

> Although decoupling deployment from release requires work to implement, the benefits are often worth it.

Reviewer: Dont think this is needed
```suggestion
```

> ## How we decouple deployment from release at PostHog

Reviewer: I think it could be better easier to follow if we first have the section on "## How you can decouple deployment from release", and then we can dive into the examples

- [Lyft](https://eng.lyft.com/continuous-deployment-at-lyft-9b457314771a) follows continuous deployment for its microservices architecture. Each deployment goes through a pipeline of staging, canary, and single zone before production. They automate jobs, monitoring, and testing for this pipeline, and they use "gates" at each step to block deployments if broken. They also wait for deploys to "bake" in production environments to check for issues before releasing.

- [Grab](https://engineering.grab.com/our-journey-to-continuous-delivery-at-grab) deploys to a staging environment then schedules deployments to a canary environment then production. They make deployment and monitoring as easy as possible and only notify developers about issues when they must make a decision.

## How you can decouple deployment from release

Now that you understand the merits of decoupling deployments from release, but how do you make this happen? Two of the easiest ways to get started are:

1. **Feature flags.** Deploy features behind [feature flags](/docs/feature-flags). Use conditional and percentage rollouts to roll out features to the internal team, beta users, and canary release.

> 2. **Dark launch.** Launch new routes and features, but hide them from users (don’t link or notify them). Test and use the production code internally. For example, create a new feature page, don’t link to it anywhere, and access it directly with a link.

Reviewer: I think this is slightly easier to follow
```suggestion
2. **Dark launch.** Launch new routes and features, but hide them from users (don’t link or notify them). For example, create a new feature page, don’t link to it anywhere, and access it directly with a link.
```

---
title: Why you should decouple deployment from release (and how) 
date: 2023-09-11
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/green-blog-image.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
 - Guides
 - Explainers
---

> Releasing a big feature can be nerve-racking. When deploying it, you don't know if it will work in production, break your app, or cause issues. Without the right processes in place, the safety of your releases is a big question mark.

Reviewer: Love this intro! So much better
```suggestion
Releasing a big feature can be nerve-racking. When deploying it, you don't know if it will work in production, break your app, or cause other issues. Without the right processes in place, the safety of your releases is a big question mark.
```

A best practice for improving this is decoupling deployment and release. What does this mean, though? This post goes over the differences between the two, why you should decouple them, examples, and how to get started.

## What are the differences between deployment and release?

The process of delivering code starts with writing and testing code locally. After completing a piece of code, it often goes through reviews and more tests before integrating with the existing codebase. 

Once integrated, the new code deploys. Deployment means getting code from a local machine or repository into production. Your app or build containing the new code becomes available on production infrastructure.

> A release is when new code is put into use or made available to users. By default, as soon as code is deployed, it is automatically released. This is because there is nothing preventing users or systems from accessing the new code available on production infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A release is when the new code is made available to users. By default, as soon as code is deployed, it is automatically released. This is because there is nothing preventing users or systems from accessing the new code available on production infrastructure.
```

> This means teams often hold deployments until they are confident the code is ready to release.

Reviewer: Just want to say that up until this point this blog is so much more interesting than the previous version 🔥🔥🔥

![Delivery process](../images/blog/decouple-deployment-from-release/delivery.png)

## Why should you separate deployment and release?

The coupling of deployment and release can cause two main issues:

> 1. New code doesn't work as expected. For example, a value saving locally but not in production due to an unexpected interaction with the production database.

Reviewer: The sentence "a value saving locally but not in production due to an unexpected interaction with the production database." is really hard to parse. Can we simplify it?

```suggestion
1. New code may not work as expected. For example, a value saving locally but not in production due to an unexpected interaction with the production database.
```

Author: Going to use a different example that I think is clearer

> 2. It breaks other features or the entire app. For example, values created by new features corrupt other data unexpectedly and crashes the app in production.

Reviewer: Coupling itself doesnt cause this. Also, is this a repetitive on what was mentioned in the intro?

And again, "values created by new features corrupt other data unexpectedly and crashes the app in production" is a bit hard to parse

```suggestion
2. It breaks other features or the entire app. For example, values created by new features corrupt other data unexpectedly and crashes the app in production.
```

Author: Just combined into one point

> By preventing new code from automatically releasing after a deployment, you lower the risk of these issues. This is known as **decoupling deployment from release**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By preventing new code from automatically releasing after a deployment, you lower the risk of these issues. This is called **decoupling deployment from release**.
```

> Doing this enables [testing code in production](/blog/testing-in-production). This process helps you discover issues arising from production infrastructure and the new code's integration with the real release.

Reviewer: Dont think the second sentence is needed. Or we can simplify it
```suggestion
Doing so enables you to [test your code safely in production](/blog/testing-in-production) and catch any issues before your users see them.
```

On top of lowering the risk of issues, decoupling can increase developer productivity and app reliability. The specific benefits include:

> - Improves developer confidence knowing they can test in production and that there is an easy way to roll back changes without affecting users.

Reviewer: this is repetitive on the previous point

```suggestion
```

Author: kept this one and removed the sentence above

- Increase deployment frequency by removing the need to wait for a formal release. 

- Developers can follow [trunk-based development](https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com/) and merge to `main` more often instead of waiting on branches. This increases shipping velocity and reduces merge conflicts.

- Developers can pass off releases to product managers and marketers once they deploy. They can coordinate elaborate launches and stakeholders without holding up development.

> - Less downtime from fewer broken releases. Easier rollbacks when an issue does occur because infrastructure (like [feature flags](/feature-flags)) is already in place.

Reviewer: I know we're trying to link to feature flags, but it feels a bit unnaturally verbose
```suggestion
- Less downtime from broken releases, and easier rollbacks when an issue does occur.
```

## How we decouple deployment from release at PostHog

As an example of decoupling deployment from release, we can look at what we do at PostHog. We deploy many changes behind feature flags and release them after testing them in production. At any time, there are [30+ flags](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/blob/03eb1dcaec3cf5064a1ace4433f2f77d6676b634/frontend/src/lib/constants.tsx#L118C1-L118C1) in use in PostHog. They are created and updated daily.

![PostHog's flags](../images/blog/decouple-deployment-from-release/flags.png)

> These flags help us dogfood features, roll out changes to specific users, do incremental rollouts, and more. For example, in the flags above, we deployed without releasing:
> 
> - Loading person data from ClickHouse to improve performance.
> - Product-specific onboarding.
> - A frontend for the new batch export system.
> - Additional person and group options on dashboards for our customer success team.

Reviewer: Im not sure the specific features are needed, and not sure if they're interesting to include (may be a bit boring to read the specifics)
```suggestion
These flags help us dogfood features, roll out changes to specific users, do incremental rollouts, and more. For example, in the flags above, we deployed 5 new features without releasing them!
```

> We also dark launch features such as our upgraded batch exports system and data warehouse. This might mean they are only accessible through the API, don’t have navigation links, or only have limited options in the released code.

Reviewer: My first reaction was what does dark launch mean. I think its clearer to include its meaning straight after using it. And again, I dont think the specifics of what feature it was is necessary nor interesting.

```suggestion
We also dark launch features using feature flags. This might mean they are only accessible through the API, don’t have navigation links, or only have limited options in the released code.
```

> Each of these changes runs through an extensive testing suite locally and on pull requests. This includes unit, integration, end-to-end, and visual tests. This enables us to be confident when deploying in the first place.

Reviewer: Not sure we need this. Feels a bit out of place: We're talking about how to safely release code in the above paragraphs, but then this section is talking about deploying safely all of a sudden
```suggestion
```

> Decoupling deployment from release enables us to ship and get features into the hands of users faster at PostHog. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All this enables us to ship and get features into the hands of users faster at PostHog. 
```

- [Lyft](https://eng.lyft.com/continuous-deployment-at-lyft-9b457314771a) follows continuous deployment for its microservices architecture. Each deployment goes through a pipeline of staging, canary, and single zone before production. They automate jobs, monitoring, and testing for this pipeline, and they use "gates" at each step to block deployments if broken. They also wait for deploys to "bake" in production environments to check for issues before releasing.

- [Grab](https://engineering.grab.com/our-journey-to-continuous-delivery-at-grab) deploys to a staging environment then schedules deployments to a canary environment then production. They make deployment and monitoring as easy as possible and only notify developers about issues when they must make a decision.

## How you can decouple deployment from release

Now that you understand the merits of decoupling deployments from release and some examples of how top companies do it, how do you make it happen yourself? Two of the easiest ways to get started are:

> 1. **Feature flags.** Deploy features behind [feature flags](/docs/feature-flags). Use conditional and percentage rollouts to roll out features to the internal team, beta users, and canary release.

Reviewer: I think conditional includes percentage, so this is simpler
```suggestion
1. **Feature flags.** Deploy features behind [feature flags](/docs/feature-flags). Use conditional rollouts to roll out features to the internal team, beta users, and canary release.
```

> 2. **Dark launch.** Launch new routes and features, but hide them from users (don’t link or notify them). For example, create a new feature page, don’t link to it anywhere, and access it directly with a link.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Dark launch.** Launch new routes and features, but hide them from users (don’t link or notify them). For example, create a new feature page and don’t link to it anywhere so that it's only accessable using a direct link (that only your team knows).
```
